--- PAGE 1 ---
Fall 2025 CMPE 462 Machine Learning
Assignment 2
Due: January 4th, 2026 by midnight
Fruit and Vegetable Dataset
In the second assignment, you will use the fruit and vegetable classication dataset collected
in the rst assignment. If you think that the dataset could be further improved, you can
continue working on the data collection, pre-processing, and feature extraction in the second
assignment, as well. If you have modied your dataset, please provide a clear explanation of
the changes made compared to the original dataset. If you proceeded with the same dataset
and features collected during the rst assignment, please briey recap the dataset statistics
and the challenges your dataset may pose for a machine learning model. You may use the best
feature set you obtained in the rst assignment.
Task 1: Classication
You will conduct a benchmarking study as part of this task. You will compare logistic regres-
sion, logistic regression with a non-linear transformation, soft-margin SVM, soft-margin SVM
with kernel trick, k-nearest neighbors classier, naive Bayes, and random forest classiers.
1. (10 points) Using a machine learning library, implement all the classiers. Report their
training times. Clearly explain how you determine the hyperparameters of the classiers,
non-linear transformations, and kernel functions. You may use regularization if necessary.
Present all the choices you made to train the classier in a table.
2. (15 points) Implement a soft-margin linear SVM from scratch without using a machine
learning library, but using a quadratic programming solver. Find the support vectors.
Find the data points that are the farthest from the hyperplane in each category.
1
--- PAGE 2 ---
(a) Visually inspect support vector data points. Is there anything special about them?
Visually compare them with data points that are farthest in each category. Discuss
your ndings.
(b) Check the distances or similarities between support vectors across dierent classes.
Rank their pairwise distances or similarities. Do the support vectors that are closest
to each other belong to the categories most confused by the classier? Comment on
your ndings.
3. (5 points) Report and compare the classication performance metrics of all the classiers
you trained. Based on your results, is your dataset highly non-linear or mostly behaves
like linear with some outliers? Please discuss.
4. Please design an outlier detection framework for your dataset using the SVM constraints.
(a) (20 points) Explain your proposed framework in detail. (Note: Do not propose di-
rectly training a classier that learns a decision boundary between outliers and non-
outlier points. Assume that you do not have any dataset with any annotation regard-
ing whether a data point is an outlier or not.)
(b) (20 points) Please also prepare a short demo video (screen-only). In the video, one
group member should present their proposed idea for outlier detection. A presentation
of 5-10 minutes should contain the following information:
Brief introduction of the idea using a gure illustrating the proposed framework.
Clear explanation regarding the evaluation protocol.
A live demo showing the detected outliers in the training set.
NOTE: You do not need to prepare slides.
Task 2: Unsupervised Learning
You will again use your fruit and vegetable dataset in this task.
1. (10 points) Apply PCA. Explore the intrinsic dimensionality of your features by using
reconstruction error and explained variance. Repeat Task 1, question 1, with the lower-
dimensional features. Comment on the performance.
2. (10 points) Apply a clustering algorithm of your choice. Evaluate its outcome using ex-
ternal and internal metrics.
Page 2
--- PAGE 3 ---
3. (10 points) Repeat question 6, part a, of Task 1 using clustering. Clearly explain your
proposed outlier detection framework based on clustering and compare its output with the
framework's output you designed in question 6, part a. You do not need to submit a video
demo this time.
Submission
1. Please submit a PDF report comprising all the details asked in the tasks above. Please
follow academic writing rules and cite your references. There is no specic format.
2. Please include a team member contribution statement at the end of your report.
3. Please include an AI use statement.
4. The PDF report will be submitted to the Turnitin assignment on Moodle. A single
submission per group is sucient. Please submit only one report per group.
5. Your datasets and implementations should be in a single zipped folder. Please include
a README for how to reproduce your results. Please include a link to your zip le in
your report.
6. Please include the link to the video demo in your PDF report.
Page 3
